---
title: "homo deus: a history of tomorrow"
date: 2021-02-25T22:12:01-05:00
categories:
  - books
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/books/homo-deus.jpg
sidebar:
  - title: author
    image: /assets/images/books/homo-deus.jpg
    image_alt: A book cover
    text: yuval noah harari
  - title: isbn
    text: 978-0062464347
  - title: publication year
    text: 2018
  - title: word count
    text: "140,000"
  - title: pages
    text: 402
---
> Sapiens rule the world because only they can weave an intersubjective web of meaning: a web of laws, forces, entities and places that exist purely in their common imagination. This web allows humans alone to organise crusades, socialist revolutions and human rights movements.

Harari has a compelling framework. The basic idea is that all structures are man-made and only exist intersubjectively; they exist solely because a consensus maintains their structure. It feels in a lot of ways like the structuralism of Foucault applied more broadly, which is as far as I am willing to take my severely under-qualified attempt to sketch Harari's philosophical underpinnings. *Homo Deus* is the story of the birth and death of modernity through the cipher of Harari's deconstruction, and what comes next.

*Homo Deus* feels more incisive than *Sapiens*, dealing directly with elements of what we hold to be self-evident, that I have worth, that I have agency, that my self is continuous and consistent. The reality, Harari argues, is that none of those things are objectively true, and based on the best science we have, humans are really just a series of complex algorithms and post-hoc justification. Harari employs Kahneman's *narrating self* and *experiencing self* to demonstrate that there is a complete, locked-off section of our minds that solely experiences things (the fast of *Thinking, Fast and Slow*), and often this self that experiences is the one in control, with our internal narrator acting as PR rep, spinning reality as experienced into a way that makes sense. We have taken humanity's greatest boon, our ability to "weave an intersubjective web of meaning", but instead of spinning narrative to propagate supernatural beliefs or moral codes for the survival of the tribe, we stitch an enchanting fiction to wrap ourselves up in. From here, Harari calls out Steven Pinker and Richard Dawkins (two prominent humanist/liberalists) and asks that if the self does not exist, how can liberalism?

Humans, as big complicated algorithms, are thus nothing but the sum of those algorithms, the data that we leave behind. Nearly our entire lives are capture by some sort of surveillance, and we give this data away for a pittance of its actual worth. I think here Harari falls into Great Oz trap of AI doomsdaying, wherein someone will broadly claim that AI will become too smart and take over humanity, unplugging them or vacuuming them up for the carbon resources, as if someone tuned a Chess model algorithm with some open-ended directive to win at all costs and this leads to the extinction of humanity because destroying the universe would lead to an optimal mimimax path. The reality is probably closer to another path Harari explores, that of the complete commoditization of our algorithms, the replacement of self-agency with computer agency. Alexa, cure my cancer, or Alexa, make my baby tall and smart.

The only thing saving this myth-busting from pure nihilism is that these structures break the intersubjective surface. While there is no inherent reality to the structures we create, they have a very real impact. We can still construct meaning, and we still have mysteries to solve that might unlock heretofore unknown secrets. While progress and knowledge have gotten us this far, once we become complete masters over the reality of our domain, we will still find meaning. It's what we do.
{% include ratings.html rating=4%}